---
cicd_tag: tools
date: 2021-03-04 07:20:00+00:00
series:
- cicd
tags:
- automation
title: New Ansible Data Validation Module(s)
---
A few months ago I described how you could [use JSON Schema to validate your automation data models](/kb/DataModels/70-Validation/), host/group variable files, or even Ansible inventory file. 

I had to use a weird toolchain to get it done -- either **ansible-inventory** to build a complete data model from various inventory sources, or **yq** to convert YAML to JSON... and just for the giggles **jsonschema** CLI command requires the JSON input to reside in a file, so you have to use a temporary file to get the job done.
<!--more-->
Obviously I could have used Python, and it wouldn't be more than a dozen or so lines of code to read YAML and have it validated with **jsonschema** Python module, but I wanted to keep it as simple as possible and probably failed. What exactly did [RFC 6670 say about squashed complexity sausage](/2012/07/virtualized-squashed-complexity-sausage/)?

Things got much simpler with the new **[validate](https://github.com/ansible-collections/ansible.utils/blob/main/docs/ansible.utils.validate_module.rst)** module in **ansible.utils** collection. You pass the data you want to have validated, the validation criteria (JSON schema describing your data), and the validation engine (currently only **jsonschema**) to the module and get back a success message or a list of errors. Great job (and thanks for the reference to my article in the [announcement blog post](https://www.ansible.com/blog/using-new-ansible-utilities-for-operational-state-management-and-remediation) 🙏)

A fair warning before you get too excited: the error messages generated by **jsonschema** could be a bit counter-intuitive. Trust me, I use it in my Git commit hooks, and while I appreciate the *all good* message every time I get one, trying to decipher what exactly I did wrong from the error message is a bit of a chore (hope you noticed how extremely polite I tried to sound, sometimes it's a \*\*\*\*\*\*\* nightmare).

Wrap those error messages in lovely JSON generated by **ansible-playbook** when a module fails, and you have a perfect puzzle to keep you awake all night when your playbook crashes on bad data at 2AM on a Sunday morning. Make sure you set [ANSIBLE_STDOUT_CALLBACK](https://docs.ansible.com/ansible/latest/reference_appendices/config.html#default-stdout-callback) to **yaml** before you start troubleshooting ;)
