---
cdate: 2022-07-10
cli_tag: cli-api
comment: 'Some SDN proponents claim that the way we configure networking devices (using
  CLI) is the biggest networking problem we’re facing today. They also conveniently
  forget that every scalable IT solution uses automation, text files and CLI… because
  they work, and allow experienced operators to work faster.


  Since I wrote this blog post, the debate shifted to _API is better than CLI_, and
  I had a [few choice things to say about that fake dilemma](/kb/tag/cli-or-api.html).

  '
date: 2014-02-18 07:05:00+01:00
sdn_101_tag: extra
series:
- sdn_101
- cli
series_weight: 130
tags:
- SDN
title: Is CLI In My Way … or Is It Just a Symptom of a Bigger Problem?
url: /2014/02/is-cli-in-my-way-or-is-it-just-symptom.html
---
My good friend Ethan recently published a blog post [rightfully complaining how various vendor CLIs hamper our productivity](https://packetpushers.net/blog/clis-are-in-my-way-abstract-all-the-things/). He's absolutely correct from the productivity standpoint, and I agree with his conclusions (we need a layer of abstraction), but there's more behind the scenes.
<!--more-->
**We're all sick of CLI**. I don't think anyone would disagree. However, CLI is not our biggest problem. We happen to be exposed to the CLI on a daily basis due to lack of automation tools and [lack of abstraction layer](https://blog.ipspace.net/2012/09/sdn-controller-northbound-api-is.html); occasional fights with the [usual brown substance flowing down the application stack](http://blog.ipspace.net/2013/04/this-is-what-makes-networking-so-complex.html) don't help either.

**The CLI problem is mostly hype**. The "we need to replace CLI with (insert-your-favorite-gizmo)" hype was generated by SDN startups ([one in particular](http://techfieldday.com/appearance/big-switch-presents-at-networking-field-day-6/)) who want to sell their "disruptive" way of doing things to the venture capitalists. BTW, the best way to configure their tools is through CLI.

**CLI is still the most effective way of doing things** -- ask any really proficient sysadmin, web server admin or database admin how they manage their environment. It's not through [point-and-click GUI](https://blog.ipspace.net/2011/01/vmware-cluster-up-and-running-in-three.html), it's through [automation tools coupled with simple CLI commands](http://highscalability.com/blog/2013/11/19/we-finally-cracked-the-10k-problem-this-time-for-managing-se.html) (because automation tools don't work that well when they have to simulate mouse clicks).

**CLI generates vendor lock-in**. Another pile of startup hype -- in this case coming from startups that want to replace the network device lock-in with controller lock-in ([here's a similar story](http://it20.info/2012/02/the-abc-of-lock-in/)).

### We're Not Unique

Startups and pundits would like to persuade you how broken "traditional" networking is, but every other field in IT has to deal with the same problems -- just try to manage Windows server with Linux commands, or create tables on Microsoft SQL server with MySQL or Oracle syntax ... even Linux distributions don't have the same command set.

The true difference between other IT fields and networking is that the other people *did something to solve their problems* while we keep complaining. Networking is no worse than any other IT discipline; we just have to start moving forward, create community tools (because vendors\' track record isn\'t exactly stellar), and vote with our wallets.

Whenever you have a choice between two comparable products from different vendors, buy the one that offers greater flexibility and programmability[^RFP]. Don't know what to look for? Talk with your server- and virtualization buddies (I hope you're on speaking term with them, or it's high time you buy them a beer or two). If they happen to use Puppet or Chef to manage servers, you might try to use the same tools to manage your routers and switches. Your favorite boxes don't support the tools used by the rest of your IT? Maybe it's time to change the vendor.

[^RFP]: For more details, read the _[Network Automation RFP Requirements](https://blog.ipspace.net/2016/10/network-automation-rfp-requirements.html)_ blog post.
