---
date: 2021-11-22 07:15:00+00:00
netlab_tag: overview
series_title: Custom Groups and Deployment Templates
tags:
- netlab
title: netlab Custom Groups and Deployment Templates
---
Using custom templates to [test IP anycast with MPLS](/2021/11/anycast-mpls/) was fun, but as I got into interesting discussions focusing on convoluted details, I found myself going through the same set of steps too many times.

It started with the need to specify individual devices in `netlab config` command to create new loopback interfaces on anycast servers but not on any other device in the lab. Wouldn't it be nice to have a *group of devices* (similar to Ansible groups) that one could use in the **limit** parameter of `netlab config`?
<!--more-->

{{<cc>}}Original topology file{{</cc>}}
```config
module: [ ospf ]
defaults.device: eos
provider: clab

nodes: [ l1, l2, l3, s1, a1, a2, a3 ]

links: [ s1-l1, s1-l2, s1-l3, l2-a1, l2-a2, l3-a3 ]
```

A few hours later[^1], I had them. *netlab* now support [custom device groups](https://netlab.tools/groups/).

[^1]: Obviously it would be easier and faster to execute those commands by hand for the next five years, but this was more fun.

**netlab create** or **netlab up** automatically create additional groups in Ansible inventory, and I can use the **anycast** group to execute `netlab config ospf-anycast-loopback.j2 --limit anycast`.

{{<cc>}}Topology file using groups{{</cc>}}
```config
module: [ ospf ]
defaults.device: eos
provider: clab

groups:
  anycast:
    members: [ a1, a2, a3 ]

nodes: [ l1, l2, l3, s1, a1, a2, a3 ]

links: [ s1-l1, s1-l2, s1-l3, l2-a1, l2-a2, l3-a3 ]
```

Next: wouldn't it be cool to deploy additional configuration templates during lab creation time? How about specifying them in the topology file? Like this...

```config
module: [ ospf ]
defaults.device: eos
provider: clab

groups:
  anycast:
    members: [ a1, a2, a3 ]
    config: [ ospf-anycast-loopback.j2 ]
  all:
    config: [ mpls-ldp.j2 ]

nodes: [ l1, l2, l3, s1, a1, a2, a3 ]

links: [ s1-l1, s1-l2, s1-l3, l2-a1, l2-a2, l3-a3 ]
```

When **netlab up** is executed, the **ospf-anycast-loopback.j2** configuration template should be deployed on anycast devices to create additional loopback interfaces, and **mpls-ldp.j2** template should be deployed on all lab devices to enable MPLS forwarding and LDP.

Another hour or two and I [got it up and running](https://netlab.tools/netlab/up/). Now I can execute **netlab up** and get a fully functional [anycast-with-MPLS lab](https://github.com/ipspace/netlab-examples/blob/master/routing/anycast-mpls-ospf/) in one go.

Finally, as I was getting annoyed by the clutter generated by the Ansible playbooks, I implemented the **quiet** flag in **netlab up** command. It sets ANSIBLE_STDOUT_CALLBACK to **selective** which really quiets down `ansible-playbook`.
